notes/implementation.md, before:

# Clojure vs ClojureScript

Here's a tricky question. Right now, the implementation of the forms API has started to move towards a convention of annotating the Hiccup elements with platform type information like:
```clojure
{:data-java-class "clojure.lang.Symbol"
 :data-clojure-symbol "my/sym"}
```

This opens up a can of worms because this type information will obviously not be consistent cross platform:
```clojure
{:data-js-class "cljs.core/Symbol"
 :data-cljs-symbol "my/sym"}
```

However, just using reader conditionals to dispatch to the appropriate platform defaults is too quick; Clojure (JVM) code might be parsed by `rewrite-clj` running in the browser, so it would not make sense to assign JS types to elements derived from JVM Clojure source code. The inverse might also be true: ClojureScript code might be parsed on the JVM. 

So part of the necessary complexity here is to convey to `adorn` whether the given form is Clojure or ClojureScript. Once `adorn` has this information it can populate the above metadata appropriately. When the ability to dynamically inspect types is available (e.g. reading cljs code from cljs, clj code from clj), use it. When it's not (e.g. reading cljs code from clj, clj code from cljs), default to static lookup and use a generic platform type (e.g. [Object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object), [`java.lang.Object`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Object.html)) placeholder value for unknown types. This implies that static lookup needs to be implemented for all primitive (e.g. non-Object) types for both clj and cljs.

The multimethod-based API may allow users to extend `adorn`'s methods to arbitrary CLJS and CLJ types.

# issues with metadata-based dispatch

There's a fundamental challenge of using metadata for dispatch: it is quite literally, a different form than the one without metadata. This means that forms will be literred with metadata everywhere. 

Setting the metadata outside the function call to `clj->hiccup` doesn't change the issue:

```clojure
(= (let [v ^{:k :v} [1 2 2]]
     (clj->hiccup v)
     )

   (clj->hiccup ^{:k :v} [1 2 2])

   )
;; => true

```

So _both_ of these forms will return a metadata node.

Dispatching based on metadata is very tricky; it seems to make more sense for already-parsed forms
like maps and vectors than for unparsed strings. This dispatch struggles to display nodes with metadata attached. There's a fundamental question here:

**should the metadata that indicates a custom display type itself be displayed along with the form when converted to a span?**

I think the potential for confusion here is pretty high. this aspect of the API needs more consideration.

Here's one idea of how it might work - this requires writing the custom dispatch in a
pretty structured way.

if there is a metadata node with the `:display/type` key, the _last child_ node of that node should inherit the :display/type key from the metadata node.

this implies that the custom class annotation will live _inside_ the resulting metadata span element rather than at the top level of that form, because of the way that they are grouped together.

but that default perhaps should be questioned - just because rewrite-clj represents metadata nodes as a grouped unit doesn't mean that adorn has to. meta->span could simply return a list with the metadata element followed by the form on which metadata is set.

## eliding metadata

A default that hides the complexity from users could be: if `display/type` is the only key in the metadata map for a given node, hide it. Otherwise, show it. The presence or absence of this key could be used to control a `:display-meta?` (or similar) key in the options map for node->meta. That way users can override the default when they want to. I think this idea is worth trying. While it makes the internals of adorn slightly more complex, it makes the interface simpler and easier to use.

Commit message:

Taking note of where metadata lives and where it comes from

notes/implementation.md, after:

# Clojure vs ClojureScript

Here's a tricky question. Right now, the implementation of the forms API has started to move towards a convention of annotating the Hiccup elements with platform type information like:
```clojure
{:data-java-class "clojure.lang.Symbol"
 :data-clojure-symbol "my/sym"}
```

This opens up a can of worms because this type information will obviously not be consistent cross platform:
```clojure
{:data-js-class "cljs.core/Symbol"
 :data-cljs-symbol "my/sym"}
```

However, just using reader conditionals to dispatch to the appropriate platform defaults is too quick; Clojure (JVM) code might be parsed by `rewrite-clj` running in the browser, so it would not make sense to assign JS types to elements derived from JVM Clojure source code. The inverse might also be true: ClojureScript code might be parsed on the JVM. 

So part of the necessary complexity here is to convey to `adorn` whether the given form is Clojure or ClojureScript. Once `adorn` has this information it can populate the above metadata appropriately. When the ability to dynamically inspect types is available (e.g. reading cljs code from cljs, clj code from clj), use it. When it's not (e.g. reading cljs code from clj, clj code from cljs), default to static lookup and use a generic platform type (e.g. [Object](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Object), [`java.lang.Object`](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/17/docs/api/java.base/java/lang/Object.html)) placeholder value for unknown types. This implies that static lookup needs to be implemented for all primitive (e.g. non-Object) types for both clj and cljs.

The multimethod-based API may allow users to extend `adorn`'s methods to arbitrary CLJS and CLJ types.

# issues with metadata-based dispatch

There's a fundamental challenge of using metadata for dispatch: it is quite literally, a different form than the one without metadata. This means that forms will be literred with metadata everywhere. 

Setting the metadata outside the function call to `clj->hiccup` doesn't change the issue:

```clojure
(= (let [v ^{:k :v} [1 2 2]]
     (clj->hiccup v)
     )

   (clj->hiccup ^{:k :v} [1 2 2])

   )
;; => true

```

So _both_ of these forms will return a metadata node.

Dispatching based on metadata is very tricky; it seems to make more sense for already-parsed forms
like maps and vectors than for unparsed strings. This dispatch struggles to display nodes with metadata attached. There's a fundamental question here:

**should the metadata that indicates a custom display type itself be displayed along with the form when converted to a span?**

I think the potential for confusion here is pretty high. this aspect of the API needs more consideration.

Here's one idea of how it might work - this requires writing the custom dispatch in a
pretty structured way.

if there is a metadata node with the `:display/type` key, the _last child_ node of that node should inherit the :display/type key from the metadata node.

this implies that the custom class annotation will live _inside_ the resulting metadata span element rather than at the top level of that form, because of the way that they are grouped together.

but that default perhaps should be questioned - just because rewrite-clj represents metadata nodes as a grouped unit doesn't mean that adorn has to. meta->span could simply return a list with the metadata element followed by the form on which metadata is set.

## an important distinction

A node can _have_ metadata without _being_ a metadata node. Rewrite-clj nodes use metadata to preserve the line and column information for the source strings or files they were parsed from, when this information is present. This distinction suggests that ->node may be able to perform the appropriate dispatch for values that only have the `:display/type` metadata set.

Maintaining this distinction may not be as easy for nodes parsed from files or strings, unless I can intercept or override part of the protocol that parses text into nodes.

## eliding metadata

A default that hides the complexity from users could be: if `display/type` is the only key in the metadata map for a given node, hide it. Otherwise, show it. The presence or absence of this key could be used to control a `:display-meta?` (or similar) key in the options map for node->meta. That way users can override the default when they want to. I think this idea is worth trying. While it makes the internals of adorn slightly more complex, it makes the interface simpler and easier to use.
